

                        THE IMPRUDENCE MANIFESTO


 THE PROBLEM

   The Second Life Viewer suffers from a stifling atmosphere of
   non-change. This atmosphere emanates from Linden Lab, whose
   attitudes and policies discourage all but the smallest and most
   superficial improvements. This is the result of the nature of
   Linden Lab as a corporation; in particular:


     * A lack of resources to invest in making significant
       improvements to the Viewer. Linden Lab is stuck treading water;
       they don't have the manpower to spend on making major
       improvements to the Viewer.

     * A burdensome Quality Assurance procedure that punishes any sort
       of change. The larger the change, the more it's punished. The
       simple fact that all changes have to pass through such an
       arduous process discourages anyone from attempting any major
       endeavor.

     * A vast throng of paying customers who want the Viewer to remain
       constant and familiar. If the Viewer changes, they are forced
       to spend effort relearning it. The most vocal and abusive users
       even meet change with sneers and insults.


   Combined, these render Linden Lab ineffectual at dealing with the
   fundamental usability problems that plague the Viewer:


     * A cluttered interface that frustrates and confuses both new and
       long-time users. It is difficult to learn, frustrating to use,
       and obscures the thing that users actually care about: the
       world.

     * Crude tools that force users into awkward and inefficient
       workflows. The tools bear little relation to the way today's
       users want to use them. Whether because these tools are
       outdated relics of the past, or just half-baked non-solutions,
       very few rise above even the "somewhat usable" mark.

     * Stability and performance problems that make the Viewer
       unreliable for any real use. Viewer crashes are an everyday
       occurance for many users, disrupting their activities,
       destroying their unsaved work, and afflicting their lives with
       undue stress and frustration.


   We don't deny that Linden Lab has made some progress in these areas
   over time. But such progress is slow and often superficial, because
   Linden Lab cannot afford to make significant improvement.
   Encumbered by their own nature, they are forced onto an untenable
   road of caution, hesitation, and prudence. This is a path that can
   lead only to stagnation.

   These fundamental usability problems will not be solved by Linden
   Lab; their atmosphere precludes it. Even the contribution of source
   code patches by open sourcers can only address one factor, Linden
   Lab's lack of resources. Patch contributors are still affected by
   the burdensome QA process and the community's anti-change attitude
   just as much as Linden Lab developers are. Any endeavor which
   relies on Linden Lab to approve and integrate changes will face the
   same bottlenecks.


 SOLUTION

   As I have described, Linden Lab's approach is characterized by
   three factors that put a damper on significant improvement or
   innovation:

     * Cautious, gradual changes over a long period of time.

     * Dependence on an overloaded central QA department.

     * Yielding to pressure from large numbers of users to reject
       change.

   It stands to reason that a project which removed or reduced these
   factors would be more free to make radical, fundamental changes to
   the Viewer. Such a project would exhibit the opposite
   characteristics:

     * More significant changes over a shorter period of time.

     * A scalable, hierarchical QA process to screen and approve
       changes.

     * Less need to satisfy users who demand non-change.

   This is precisely the sort of project we propose to undertake.
   Because our approach is incautious, and perhaps even reckless, we
   have dubbed the project Imprudence. Goals

   The primary goal of Imprudence is simple: to greatly improve the
   usability of the Viewer. In particular, there are 3 aspects of
   usability that we intend to address:

     * Approachability. Improving comfort and ease of use, especially
       for new or non-technical users.

     * Efficiency. Improving speed and ease of common tasks and
       workflows.

     * Satisfaction. Improving the emotional effect of the software on
       the user.

   This is not to minimize other aspects of usability, such as
   reliability, accessibility, or internationalization/localization.
   We recognize their importance, but lack the expertise to properly
   address them. We welcome people with such expertise to join the
   project and help.


 METHOD

   In order to achieve these goals, we propose to combine the open and
   distributed nature of open source development with the dedication
   to quality design usually associated with commercial products. The
   main highlights of our approach are:

     * Open, public project management. Our plans, goals, and roadmaps
       are laid out on the table. Our code is published in plain view
       as it's written. There won't be any sudden bombshells to
       disrupt your plans.

     * A pro-change atmosphere. Change is natural and healthy, and it
       is the only way to make improvement. We encourage experimental
       change, coupled with evaluation to filter out the negative.
       Users wanting a static, unchanging viewer should look
       elsewhere.

     * Designers, programmers, and users working with each other. Good
       software requires more than just a team of programmers. It
       needs designers listening to users, programmers working with
       designers, and users testing and providing feedback. Every role
       is necessary and appreciated.

     * Commmunity involvement. There are many ways to be involved,
       whatever your interests, skill set, or level of commitment.
       Contributions are welcomed, not looked upon as burdens.

     * A modern, distributed development model. The Git version
       control system makes it easy for programmers to work freely
       without stepping on each others' toes. Easy and powerful
       branching and merging tools mean that releases will never be
       littered with untested, half-baked code.

     * A scalable, hierarchical QA model. New contributions work their
       way up a hierarchy of approval, which will start small and grow
       naturally as load increases. By the time a contribution reaches
       the top of the hierarchy, it has been tested, polished, and
       approved by multiple people, and is ready to be integrated.


 A CALL FOR VOLUNTEERS

   Imprudence is an open-source, volunteer effort; it depends on
   people like you getting involved! There are many ways to
   contribute, and most of them don't require any programming skills
   or special knowledge -- just some free time and the will to be part
   of something great.

   If you'd like to contribute in any way, have a look at
   CONTRIBUTE.txt.

   You have nothing to lose, and a better SL experience to gain!


 SIGNATORIES

   Jacek Antonelli       (August 27, 2008)
   McCabe Maxsted        (August 27, 2008)
